+++
draft = true
date = 1997-02-11T11:07:53+01:00
title = "The story of Heatwave, our Commodore 64 demoscene gang"
description = "How it all came about"
slug = ""
tags = []
categories = []
externalLink = ""
series = []
+++

## The Commodore 64 home computer

Around 1987, Michel and Dennis, two cousins living in Leiden/Netherlands had
nagged their parents long enough to buy them a [Commodore
64](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Commodore_64) home computer. At the time, the
c-64 was the coolest consumer computer around.

![Commodore 64](/images/Commodore-64-Computer-512.png)

> The Commodore 64 homecomputer ([source](https://armchairarcade.com/perspectives/2016/04/14/news-new-commodore-64-coming-healthy-dose-skepticism/#prettyPhoto))

Back in those days in the Netherlands, the c-64 was being displayed in a large
convenience store called
[V&D](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Vroom_%26_Dreesmann), where anyone could
play around with it.  For a lot of dutch kids of this generation, that was the
first memory they have of getting hooked to the machine. They all remember
typing in something like `10 print "Michel was here ";goto 10` and watching the
message scroll endlessly over the screen, making them feel like real wizzkids in
front of the other customers.

Michel started copying games (on tape) from friends and family and having a go
at the built-in programming language,
[BASIC](https://www.c64-wiki.com/wiki/BASIC). Dennis teamed up with his
neighbour, John, and started to acquire more hardware, like the [1541 disk
drive](https://www.c64-wiki.com/wiki/Commodore_1541) and the [KCS power
cartridge](https://rr.pokefinder.org/wiki/Power_Cartridge). Also, they started
to call themselves [Compy Software Leiden](https://csdb.dk/group/?id=5551)

## KCS Power Cartridge

Now the KCS power cartridge was something else. With it you could reset the c-64
without turning it off, make a print-screen, turbo-load software etc. But the
real magic was in the machine-language monitor. With the monitor you could peek
into the c-64's memory, showing the machine language that made up the software.

![KCS Power Cartridge animated screenshot](/images/Power_Cartridge.gif)

> KCS Power Cartridge screenshots ([source](https://ar.c64.org/wiki/Power_Cartridge))

[BASIC](https://www.c64-wiki.com/wiki/BASIC) was a fine programming language for
consumers, but it was clunky and lacked speed. Most serious software was being
written in the mysterious "machine language", which, unlike BASIC, is the
language the hardware really understands. It was tight, fast and unlike BASIC
programs, which could be inspected by anyone, invisible to the normal user.

With the KCS power cartridge you could at any time, show what was in the c-64's
memory. All you had to do is load some software, start the monitor and find the
machine code for it. You then could change the code and see what happens. This
opened up a whole new world of opportunies.

## The Demoscene

One of the reasons for buying a c-64 in those days, was the amount of games that
was "freely" available for it. Every c-64 owner was busy copying games from each
other (remember there was no internet!). Before they could be copied, wizzkids
would remove the copy protection and place a little message before the game
started to show off what they did. Not showing their own name of course, but
using an alias, or "handle".

Over time, these intros became more elaborate, the hackers were using the intros
to show off their coding skills, adding music and all kinds of visual hacks to
impress people. They often were a pleasure to look at, both for the visuals and
the way they seemed to stretch the limitations of the c-64, making it do things
nobody had seen before.

After a while these intros became a phenomenon in their own right, and started
to break loose from the cracked games they were attached to. They evolved into
demos, growing bigger in size and consisting of multiple parts. The demoscene
was born.

To Michel, Dennis and John this demoscene was fascinating. And with the KCS
power cartridge they had the tool to explore this mysterious world of demo
coding. Michel joined Compy Software Leiden (CSL) and the three of them got
handles. Dennis became "Hires", John became "Herion", and Michel became "Mad B".
They started off poking around in people's demos, changing texts to make it look
like they made them. They were stealing other people's demos. Not a thing to be
proud of, but by changing the existing machine code they learned a lot about it.
After a while they started making their own demos.

## Members and Groupnames

Soon Michel found another coder to join CSL, Bas, using the handle "Bit Byter".
They started making demos (see the Releases section) and gathering some more
members (see Members).

One notable member, who was with us only a very short time, is Reyn Ouwehand.
Back then he was part of Paradize, who were making a game somewhere in obscurity
in Katwijk. Bas got in touch with them through an ad in the paper and went to
visit them. Paradize consisted of Reyn (MacMagic), John (Genius) and Dennis
(Dagger). We asked Reyn to join us, and for him and his groupmates to come with
us to one of the legendary monthly demoscene meetings in Venlo. At the meeting,
everyone noted Paradize's skills, and Reyn was asked to join Scoop, a much more
famous group. So we had to say goodbye to our prized musician and watch him
becoming famous :)

Over time, it was sometimes felt we needed a new groupname. Our names:

- Compy Software Leiden (CSL)
- The Sixth Sense (TSS)
- Internal Affairs (IA)
- Heatwave (HTW)

## Eddies Adventure

Eddies Adventure was our last demo release on the scene, released in 1991 at the
Silicon Summer Party in Utrecht/NL. The idea was to make our best demo yet, make
everything ourselves, and have a theme.  It was common practise and perfectly
acceptable to use resources like music, fonts and graphics from other people's
demo's or games in your own demo. For this one, however, we planned to make
everything, code, graphics, fonts and music, ourselves. We were also impressed
with the themed demo's that Crest was making at the time. Rather then just have
a demo consisting of unrelated parts, they had a theme like "Mc Donalds
Restaurant", "Ice Cream Castle" and "The Bubble Tale".

Our theme was a Lucasarts kind of adventure interface where our main character
(Eddie), could walk around a demoparty, and pick up things, look at things etc.
Every time he looks at a computer screen, you see a demo part.

After Eddies adventure it became quiet. In 1995 Michel and Marvin made a tune
for the disk magazine Pulse. This can be regarded as the last release ever on
c64 by Heatwave.

## After the c64

After the commodore 64 days, Heatwave mainly became a group of musicians. Marvin
attracted a new member, Afzal, and Dennis and Robin started to have a go at
music too. Moving away from the commodore 64, we mostly started using
"trackers", music software on Amiga and PC.

We weren't very active in the demoscene anymore. In 1996 we went to The Party 6
in Aars/Denmark where we each released a tune for the music competition. The
next year we went to X97 and released another tune there.
